README.md, before:

# GPatch
## Assemble contigs into a chromosome-scalse pseudo-assembly using alignments to a reference sequence.

Starting with alignments of contigs to a reference genome, produce a chromosome-scale pseudoassembly by patching gaps between mapped contigs with sequences from the reference.

## Dependencies
* Python >= v3.7
* samtools (https://github.com/samtools/samtools)
* biopython (https://biopython.org/)
* pysam (https://github.com/pysam-developers/pysam)
* minimap2 (https://github.com/lh3/minimap2)

We recommend using minimap2 for alignment, using the -a option to generate SAM output.

## Installation

We recommend installing with conda, into a new environment:
```
conda create -n GPatch -c conda-forge -c bioconda Bio pysam minimap2 samtools GPatch
```

Install with pip:
```
pip install GPatch
```

Installation from the github repository is not recommended. However, if you must, follow the steps below:
1) git clone https://github.com/adadiehl/GPatch
2) cd GPatch/
3) python3 -m pip install -e .


## Usage
```
usage: GPatch.py [-h] -q SAM/BAM -r FASTA [-x STR] [-b FILENAME] [-m N]
                 [-w PATH] [-d]
```

Starting with alignments of contigs to a reference genome, produce a chromosome-scale pseudoassembly by patching gaps between mapped contigs with sequences from the reference. Reference chromosomes with no mapped contigs are printed to output unchanged.

#### Required Arguments
| Argument | Description |
|---|---|
| __-q SAM/BAM, --query_bam SAM/BAM__ | Path to SAM/BAM file containing non-overlapping contig mappings to the reference genome. |
| __-r FASTA, --reference_fasta FASTA__ | Path to reference genome fasta. |

#### Optional Arguments:
| Argument | Description |
|---|---|
| __-h, --help__ | Show this help message and exit. |
| __-x STR, --prefix STR__ | Prefix to add to output file names. Default=None |
| __-b FILENAME, --store_final_bam FILENAME__ | Store the final set of primary contig alignments to the given file name. Default: Do not store the final BAM. |
| __-m N, --min_qual_score N__ | Minimum mapping quality score to retain an alignment. Default=30 |
| __-w PATH, --whitelist PATH__ | Path to BED file containing whitelist regions: i.e., the inverse of blacklist regions. Supplying this will have the effect of excluding alignments that fall entirely within blacklist regions. Default=None |
| __-d, --drop_missing__ | Omit unpatched reference chromosome records from the output if no contigs map to them. Default: Unpatched chromosomes are printed to output unchanged. |
| __-t, --no_trim__ | Do not trim the 5-prime end of contigs whose mappings overlap the previously-placed contig. Default: Overlapping contig sequence will be trimmed at the previous 3-prime contig breakpoint. |

## Output

GPatch produces three output files:
| File | Description |
|---|---|
| __patched.fasta__ | The final patched genome. |
| __contigs.bed__ | Location of contigs in the coordinate frame of the patched genome. |
| __patches.bed__ | Location of patches in the coordinate frame of the reference genome. |


## Citing GPatch
Please use the following citation if you use this software in your work:

Fast and Accurate Draft Genome Patching with GPatch
Adam Diehl, Alan Boyle
bioRxiv 2025.05.22.655567; doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.22.655567

Commit message:

Improved self-documentation to include warnings about default behaviors and phased assemblies. Adds --scaffold_only, --gap_length, --no_extend, and --keep_nested options.

README.md, after:

# GPatch
## Assemble contigs into a chromosome-scalse pseudo-assembly using alignments to a reference sequence.

Starting with alignments of contigs to a reference genome, produce a chromosome-scale pseudoassembly by patching gaps between mapped contigs with sequences from the reference.

## Dependencies
* Python >= v3.7
* samtools (https://github.com/samtools/samtools)
* biopython (https://biopython.org/)
* pysam (https://github.com/pysam-developers/pysam)
* minimap2 (https://github.com/lh3/minimap2)

We recommend using minimap2 for alignment, using the -a option to generate SAM output.

## Installation

We recommend installing with conda, into a new environment:
```
conda create -n GPatch -c conda-forge -c bioconda Bio pysam minimap2 samtools GPatch
```

Install with pip:
```
pip install GPatch
```

Installation from the github repository is not recommended. However, if you must, follow the steps below:
1) git clone https://github.com/adadiehl/GPatch
2) cd GPatch/
3) python3 -m pip install -e .


## Usage
```
usage: GPatch.py [-h] -q SAM/BAM -r FASTA [-x STR] [-b FILENAME] [-m N]
                 [-w PATH] [-d]
```

Starting with alignments of contigs to a reference genome, produce a chromosome-scale pseudoassembly by patching gaps between mapped contigs with sequences from the reference. By default, reference chromosomes with no mapped contigs are printed to output unchanged. Use the --drop_missing option to disable this behavior. By default, patches are applied to the 5' and 3' telomere ends of pseudochromsomes if the first and last contig alignments do not extend to the start/end of the chromsome. In some cases, this may cause spurious duplications. Use the --no_extend option if this is a concern. Note tht GPatch is designed to be run on single-haplotype or unphased genome assemblies. For phased assemblies, each haplotype should be separated into its own input FASTA file prior to alignment. GPatch can then be run separately on the BAM files for each haplotype to obtain phased pseudoassemblies, otherwise results will be unpredictable and likely incorrect.

#### Required Arguments
| Argument | Description |
|---|---|
| __-q SAM/BAM, --query_bam SAM/BAM__ | Path to SAM/BAM file containing non-overlapping contig mappings to the reference genome. |
| __-r FASTA, --reference_fasta FASTA__ | Path to reference genome fasta. |

#### Optional Arguments:
| Argument | Description |
|---|---|
| __-h, --help__ | Show this help message and exit. |
| __-x STR, --prefix STR__ | Prefix to add to output file names. Default=None |
| __-b FILENAME, --store_final_bam FILENAME__ | Store the final set of primary contig alignments to the given file name. Default: Do not store the final BAM. |
| __-m N, --min_qual_score N__ | Minimum mapping quality score to retain an alignment. Default=30 |
| __-w PATH, --whitelist PATH__ | Path to BED file containing whitelist regions: i.e., the inverse of blacklist regions. Supplying this will have the effect of excluding alignments that fall entirely within blacklist regions. Default=None |
| __-d, --drop_missing__ | Omit unpatched reference chromosome records from the output if no contigs map to them. Default: Unpatched chromosomes are printed to output unchanged. |
| __-s, --scaffold_only__ | Pad gaps between placed contigs with strings of N characters instead of patching with sequence from the reference assembly. Effectively turns GPatch into a reference-guided scaffolding tool. Note that patches.bed will still be generated to document (inverse) mapped contig boundaries in reference frame. |
| __-l N, --gap_length N__ | Length of "N" gaps separating placed gontigs when using --scaffold_only. Has no effect when in default patching mode. Default=Estimate gap length from alignment. |
| __-e, --no_extend__ | Do not patch telomere ends of pseudochromosomes with reference sequence upstream of the first mapped contig and downstream of the last mapped contig. Default is to include 5' and 3' patches to extend telomeres to the ends implied by the alignment. |
| __-k, --keep_nested__ | Do not drop contigs with mapped positions nested entirely inside other mapped contigs. Instead, these will be bookended after the contig in which they are nested. Default is to drop contigs with mapped positions nested entirely within other mapped contigs. |

## Output

GPatch produces three output files:
| File | Description |
|---|---|
| __patched.fasta__ | The final patched genome. |
| __contigs.bed__ | Location of contigs in the coordinate frame of the patched genome. |
| __patches.bed__ | Location of patches in the coordinate frame of the reference genome. |


## Citing GPatch
Please use the following citation if you use this software in your work:

Fast and Accurate Draft Genome Patching with GPatch
Adam Diehl, Alan Boyle
bioRxiv 2025.05.22.655567; doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.22.655567
